---
layout: post
title:  "Let There be Light: The EoR"
date:   2020-05-18 13:07:46 -0700
categories: pizza
---


The Epoch of Reionization (EoR) is, in a sense, the beginning of the Universe
proper, a time which the Universe gained order, form, and diversity it had not
previously had. This period was arguably the most important part of the Universe's
history despite its short reign spanning from about 400 million years after the
Big Bang up until approximately the billionth year of the Universe, and it is
only recently that, with the help of some of the most impressive instrumentation
hardware ever devised, this exciting period of the Universe is starting to come
into view.

---

<br/>

*Now the earth was formless and void, and darkness was over the surface of the deep.*
*And God said, “Let there be light,” and there was light.*
*And God saw that the light was good, and He separated the light from the darkness.*
--Genesis 1:2-4

<br/>

Indeed, in the beginning, the Universe was essentially formless and void. The Big
Bang, a period in which the Universe expanded by untold factors, left a universe
that was essentially isotropic (of the same shape no matter what orientation it
was looked at) and smooth: every point in space was essentially
indistinguishable from any other point in space.

While the Big Bang itself was a very hot event that allowed enough energy to
fuse together the building blocks in protons and neutrons and electrons into the
atoms that would eventually build the Sun and our Solar System, the ensuing
period afterwards saw the universe cool to the extent where this could no longer
happen.

This period, recombination, saw the opaque gas of ionized hydrogen (which was by
far the most common atom created ine Big Bang) turn into molecular hydrogen, the
kind that we recognize on Earth. This molecular hydrogen is clear to most types
of light, and as such, the Universe became clear to light for the first time
in its history, lifting the fog on the Universe that had been imposed on
observers since its birth.

<br/>

<img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/wmap.jpg">
WMAP's map of the CMB (Credit: WMAP Science Team, NASA)

---

<br/>

The universe at this time is a huge volume of hydrogen of nearly uniform density.
However, it is not quite perfectly uniform in density, a property reflected today
in a snapshot of the recombination period called the Cosmic Microwave Background
(CMB), which found that the Universe was warmer (very slightly) in some parts of
the sky than others, and therefore slighly less dense, in the same way that the
air in hot air balloons is less dense than the air around it. This slight lack
of smoothness is essential in the creation of our very distinct and clearly not
perfectly smooth Universe of today.

Why it is only a part per ten thousand away from being smooth while not being
perfectly smooth is not known, as are many other questions about the reasons why
the Universe's starting conditions are such that they are. It is this very
slight imperfection, however, that allows for what will soon occur to transform
the Universe. The force now that is given sway in this uneven universe is one we
experience every day: gravity. It is by the hand of gravity, then, that did the
work of dividing the light from the dark to create the modern Universe.

<br/>

<img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/hh24.jpg">
Protostar Herbig–Haro 24 (Credit NASA, ESA, Hubble Heritage / Hubble-Europe Collaboration)

---
<br/>

This is a contemporary protostar, a reasonable facsimile of what the earliest
blooming stars in the Universe may have resembled. We cannot see individual
stars form from this era, as they are some thirteen billion years in the past
and therefore proportionally far away (due to the finite speed of light), but
the physics are relatively similar now as they were in those early days.

Protostars like this one gain energy from the speed gained by particles
collapsing inwards on the nascent star, giving them the energy that allows for
the beginning of nuclear fusion, lighting the Universe anew with intense
radiation capable once again of imparting enough energy into nearby hydrogen
atoms to drive them into an ionized state, creating an epoch of reionization of
the universe. While the Epoch of Reionization is merely the period when this
first occured throughout the Universe, the reionized universe created during the
EoR is the same one we see today; there have been no changes to the general form
of the Universe in the 13 billion years that follow it.

These early bloomers are the first glimpses of the Universe we know today, and
their existence, as far as we know, was not very long: no stars from this
original period seem to exist today, as they probably formed very large and have
correspondingly short lifetimes. Like these stars, though, the Universe itself
was living at a breakneck pace, and it would soon be filled with stars that
would follow these pioneers (called Population III stars), including our own
star, the Sun.

At the time of about 300 hundred million years since the Big Bang, the Universe
was an unrecognizable, smooth mush; five hundred million years later,
a time period approximately as long as species such as horseshoe crab have
existed on Earth, the Universe had become eminently recognizable to our own. It
is this astounding progression that inspires the great deal of research that has
gone into this time period of history, research that has been aided by some of
the most impressive and expansive instrumentation in astronomy, instruments that
rival other great feats of engineering for the most impressive works that
humanity has wrought.

<br/>

<img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/arecibo.jpg">
Ariciebo Telescope (Credit: Mario Roberto Durán Ortiz)

---

<br/>

Perhaps the most famous radio telescope is Aricebo, located in Puerto Rico. Its
thousand foot dish was one of the largest structures in the world when it was
built, a structure worthy of being a backdrop for a James Bond film (GoldenEye).
It has since been passed in its size by dishes such as the Five hundred meter
Apeture Spherical Telescope (1600') in China, as well as by telescope arrays
such as the Jansky Very Large Array (VLA), but the scale of any of these
instruments is nearly unparalleled. These telescopes can be so big because they
don't have to be precise to quite the same levels as optical telescopes, and in
their size they allow for some incredibly fine resolution imaging of a very old
Universe.

While the Aricebo telescope is likely the most famous radio telescope, it is no
longer the candle-bearer which illuminates the cutting edge of our EoR
understanding. The current standard in very low-wavelength astronomy such as
that needed to see into the past. Two of the most state-of-the art instruments
in radio astronomy, HERA and MWA, do not look like telescopes at all, and it
would not be entirely surprising to confuse them with some other non-scientific
apparatus.

These telescopes are not imaging telescopes in the way that a dish-type
telescope is; instead, they belong to a distinct class of telescope that relies
on a measurement method called interferometry. Interferometry is a significantly
more computationally expensive means of looking into space by relying on the
wave-like property of light to detect how much out-of-phase two antennas located
some distance away from each other are.

For a single point source, this is fairly easy, the calculations relying on some
trigonometry to calculate the location in the sky an object must be due to the
slight phase difference between differing antennas. For an entire sky, however,
this is impossible to do without a supercomputer, as all of space is emitting
light at the telescope at the same time, which then has to be calculated back
to the points in the sky from where they came.

<img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/mwa.jpg">
The MWA telescope (Credit: MWA)

---

Radio telescopes are particularly suitable for seeing the conditions of the
universe, which can not only see the very faint backdrop of the fireball from
which the Universe started, but also the tale told by a hint left in the quantum
mechanics of the hydrogen atom.

This fascinating and very useful property of the hydrogen atom, which makes up
the vast majority of the Universe, is its 21 centimeter spin-flip transition.
Essentially, the hydrogen atom can undergo a spontaneous reorganization of its
magnetic poles, releasing a vibration in the form of light that is 21
centimeters in wavelength.

It is this rare and random vibration that radio telescopes can use to map out
where neutral hydrogen atoms live and therefore where the stuff in the Universe
is. This map of neutral hydrogen, that which has not been perturbed by intense
starlight, is the map of how energy and matter was and is distributed through
our universe, and as such is one of the keys to mapping out the Epoch of
Reionization, and in doing so, the formative years of the Universe of today.

---

Another particular piece of physics that bears mentioning here is the phenomenon
of redshift. As we can see by the largeness of our current Universe compared to
the tiny point where the Big Bang occured, the space we inhabit has grown quite
a bit over the years. The fact that the Universe itself has grown larger means
that waves, such as light, also get bigger with time along with it, drawing
their wavelength out and lowering their energy. As the longest wavelength part
of the visible spectrum is red, this phenomenon is termed "redshift".

Redshift is both a blessing and a curse for looking into the early Universe and
the EoR. Because light created at different times (wherein the Universe is of a
different size) is correspondingly affected differently by this redshift effect,
redshift is an excellent tool to seperate how old and how far away events are by
the wavelength of particular emissions such as the 21 centimeter line mentioned
earlier.

The Epoch of Reionization itself occured around a redshift in the neighborhood
of 10: the Universe was ten times smaller than it is today, making the 21cm line
emitted at the time to grow to 2.1 meters as we see it in telescopes on Earth.
2.1 meters is a very low energy wavelength, with a characteristic energy about
four million times less than that of visible light, making it incredibly faint
and hard to pick up.

To add to the difficulty of this situation, it is at this moment that it should
be mentioned that the two-meter band of radio signals is one shared by another
phenomenon. Sadly, this phenomenon is nowhere near as cool as the flight path of
light leaving clouds of gas formed at the dawn of the Universe, and additionally
is one that the forces of the scientific community have been unable to quash
over its many years of existence.

The phenomenon, of course, is television. Television broadcasts occupy the meat
of the EoR frequency range, greatly overpowering the light that filters in from
billions of light-years away. It is for this reason that scientists must flee
to the most remote regions of the world they can find, and the result is that
the two interferometric telescopes aformentioned inhabit very sparse parts of
South Africa and Austrailia, respectively.

<img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/h21.jpg">
Map of the 21cm radio sky (Credit: Benjamin Winkel & the HI4PI Collaboration)

While this picture is swamped by our two nearest galaxies, the Milky Way and
the Magellenic Clouds, its mapping of the neutral hydrogen is a key cog in
understanding the Epoch of Reionization. The densities of neutral hydrogen gas
in the Universe can tell astronomers how the Universe must have evolved to reach
the state it is seen in today, as light from faraway hydrogen clouds at an
earlier stage of the Universe reach our present day much later than when the
light was generated.

<br/>

---

<br/>

While radio astronomy is perhaps the most widely used tool in probing the Epoch
of Reionization, this article would be remiss in not briefly mentioning visible
and infrared imaging of structures from this era. This is an exceptionally
difficult task, as these objects are necessarily ~13 billion years old and the
light has to have traveled towards Earth for that entire time, making objects
from this era very dim and hard to detect. Indeed, evidence for galaxies (the
*smallest* structures visible at these distances and lookback times) looks
something like this:

<img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/z10_vlt.jpg">
Potential z=10 galaxy observation (Credit: R. Pello, D. Schaerer et al., VLT, ESO)

Understandably, a great cover for *Nature* this does not make, and this is the
cost of being the first generation to see so deeply into the Universe's history.
Even so, higher-frequency telescopes like the 8.2m visible-band telescope used
to image this galaxy-like object are indeed useful cogs in finding the first
structures the Universe assembled.

Notable galaxies imaged in this way include Cosmos Redshift 7 (seen as it was
800 million years after the Big Bang), EGSY8p7 (570 million years old),
and GN-z11 (400 million years old); these very old galaxies, seen as they were
about 13 billion years ago, complement the radio telescope findings of hydrogen
to help compete a picture of the Universe in these early days.

---

While the study of the EoR itself looks very much into the past, the fundamental
objective shared with other sciences is not lost. Science, as a method, is the
task of looking at past events (in non astronomical sciences, usually set up as
an experiment) to draw conclusions that illuminate how existence works for later
times where we may want to predict something.

The study of the EoR, in particular, has its data collected from events very,
very far in the past, but the goal of this study remains the same as other
science: to catch as large of a glimpse of the future as we can by rummaging
through the past (a nice bonus for studying the EoR is that the "future" that it
predicts also includes most of the history of the Earth).

The understanding of the Epoch of Reionization is rapidly emerging, and with any
luck, soon we will be able to pry back the lid a little more and capture this
period in the Universe's history a little more. With any luck, we'll soon be
able to live in the past just a little more.∎

<br/>

---

<img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/atca.jpg">
ATCA (Credit: Graeme L. White & Glen Cozens (James Cook University))

A syzygy over the Australia Telescope Compact Array radio telescopes.

